no pre : Discrete Mathematics , Computer Skills for Scientific
Faculties , Fundamentals of Information
Technology , calculus 1 , Accounting -1 , Principles of Microeconomics
 

Pass Qualification Exam  : Computer Skills for Scientific
Faculties

Computer Skills for Scientific
Faculties  : Object Oriented Programming, Web Applications Development


Object Oriented Programming :Data Structures ,Database Management Systems
,Data mining ,Advanced Java Programming 


Data structures : Theory of Algorithms ,Computer Networks ,
Operating Systems ,Simulation in Business , Special Topics , Software Packages ,
Multimedia ,Artificial Intelligence


Web Applications Development : Web Server Programming ,Advanced web development ,
Human Computer Interaction

Fundamentals of Information
Technolog : Management Information Systems  , Computer Ethics ,


Advanced web development : e-Business ,e-Learning & Applications ,
,e-Government 


Linear Algebra for Computational
Sciences : Knowledge Management Systems ,Multimedia ,Data mining 


Discrete Mathematics : Statistical Packages  ,Document Analysis & Recognition 





Computer Networks : Information Security and Privacy ,Fundamentals of IoT ,
Advanced computer networks 



calculus 1 : Linear Algebra for Computational
Sciences


Statistical Packages :Enterprise Resource Planning
Systems ,Business Intelligence , Total Quality Management ,
Operations Research 





Software Engineering : IT Project Management ,Systems Analysis and Design , Total Quality Management
 

Theory of Algorithms : Document Analysis & Recognition 


Management Information Systems : Information Resource
Management 

Business Intelligence  :Semantic Web , Information Retrieval

Information Security and Privacy :  Security Risk Management and
Ethics 


Operating Systems : Enterprise Application
Development 


Database Management Systems  :Software Engineering ,Information Security and Privacy,

Database Languages & Tools ,Data mining


project 1 pass 90 hours : project 2



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------





Discrete Mathematics : This course studies the mathematical elements of computer science and their applications. Topics
include propositional logic; predicate logic; mathematical reasoning; techniques of proof;
mathematical induction; set theory; number theory; matrices; sequences and summations; functions,
relations and their properties, elementary graph theory, and tree (graph theory). In each subject, its
characteristics, forms, ways of representing it, the operations used in it, and ways of linking these
subjects together are studied. Homework will be assigned.



Computer Skills for Scientific Faculties : This course studies the fundamental concepts of programming using C++. Topics includes: basic
structures of programming tools, like: variable names, data types, input and output statements, and
output formatting. Files. Selection statements structures. Repetition statements structures.
Functions. Enumeration datatype and strings data type. Arrays; 1D and 2D. The lectures will be
provided in the lab through active teaching methodologies individually or within groups.


Fundamentals of Information Technology : 
This course will introduce the fundamental knowledge of information technologies, and it works as
an introductory course for computer-related courses. It is a combination between a theoretical and
a practical course. In particular, the course provides students with a grounding knowledge on several
areas of information technologies including cutting edge technologies, careers in IT, basic concepts
of cloud computing and web technologies, and a general perceptive of project management.
Students are also going to be introduced practically to hardware maintenance, software diagnostics
and technical support. In addition, critical thinking methodologies and techniques will be discussed,
including numbering systems, flowcharts and related case studies. Operating systems such as
LINUX/UNIX with, memory allocation, and an introduction to networks and security, and block
chain concepts. The final part is concerned with technical applications needed such as excel,
advanced excel, technical writing, report generating and type writing. Technical sections will be
taught on lab sessions and group works. Active learning methodologies will be applied through role
playing, presentations and problem solving exercises.


Web Applications Development :This course aims to improve students’ ability in Front-End Web applications development using
client-side programming such as HTML 5, Cascading Style Sheet (CSS3), JavaScript. In addition,
the students will learn the fundamental concepts of front-end web development frameworks such
as Bootstrap and React front-end frameworks. The course will cover the Bootstrap framework,
which is the most popular CSS framework for creating responsive mobile-first websites. This
course will teach you how to create pages of a website using the Bootstrap v5 framework. In
addition, the course also covers the basic concepts of the React framework such as
Communicating with Props, Class-Based Components, State in React Components, Lifecycle
Methods, Handling User Input with Forms and Events, Making API Requests with React, and
Single Page Application Development. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as
weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects.


Object Oriented Programming :The course aims to cover the fundamental concepts of OOP, such as Encapsulation and InformationHiding, Inheritance, Polymorphism, and Abstraction. The course uses Java Programming language
starting from the basic Java syntax based on Eclipse IDE. It focuses on the understanding and
practical mastery of OOP principles and Java components, such as classes, objects, input/output,
scanner objects (to read either from the keyboard or a file), loops, decision-making, array and
multidimensional array, data abstraction, methods, method overloading, objects garbage-collector,
an introduction to exception-handling, etc. Finally, it presents an introduction to JavaFX and its
hierarchy based on Java inheritance OOP concepts, for developing rich client applications. Lectures
will be given in the lab for practical application. This course is assessed through exams, practical
tests and assignments.


Data Structures :This Course introduces the students to the concepts of data structures. Topics include: Pointers,
and pointer operations. Array implementation of lists, stacks, and queues. Dynamic
implementation of lists (singly, doubly, circular), stack operations and queue operations (and their
implementation as linked lists). STL, like: vectors, pairs, maps, sets, lists, stacks, queue.
Recursion. Tree dynamic, like binary search trees, segment, red-black, AVL trees. Hash Table and
Collision resolution. Weekly lab assignments will be given to the students and to be discussed
through active teaching methodologies, in addition to problem solving tasks.


Database Management Systems :The course aims to provide students with an overview of database management system architecture
and environment, an understanding of the basic database design and implementation techniques,
and a practical experience of designing and building relational databases. Furthermore, it enables
applying conceptual design methodologies for databases and learning about the architecture and
environments of the database management system. Students will practice using database tools to
create and manage database schemas systems and formulate DDL, DML commands and run SQL
queries. Advanced SQL topics such as creating database functions, database Stored Procedures and
database Triggers will be covered. Also, students will learn how to manage database privileges and
design suitable security and integrity constraints for database schemas. Furthermore, the course will
provide the students with practice project to connect a relational DB using a programming language,
in addition to practice using basic Oracle Forms and Oracle Reports. This course will use a
combination of traditional lectures, active teaching methodologies, and hands-on lab lectures.

Linear Algebra for Computational Sciences :The course uses linear algebra as one of the most important tools in applied mathematics, data
science, and artificial intelligence to help students learn how to handle vectors and matrices, solve
matrix-vector equations, perform Eigen value and Eigen vector and diagonalization analyses and
use principal component analysis to do dimension reduction on real-world datasets. It covers topics
such as: solving systems of linear equations; matrices and matrix operations; homogeneous and nonhomogeneous systems; Gaussian elimination; elementary matrices and a method for finding A−1;
determinants; Euclidean vector spaces; linear transformations from Rn to Rm and their properties;
general vector spaces; subspaces; basis; dimension; row space; column space; null space of a matrix;
rank and nullity; and inner product spaces. All analysis will be performed in python or any similar
popular programming language. Lectures will be given in the lab for practical application. This
course is assessed through exams, practical tests and assignments.


Calculus-1 : Functions: domain, operations on functions, graphs of functions; trigonometric functions; limits:
meaning of a limit, computational techniques, limits at infinity, infinite limits; continuity; limits and
continuity of trigonometric functions; the derivative: techniques of differentiation, derivatives of
trigonometric functions; the chain rule; implicit differentiation; differentials; Roll’s Theorem; the
mean value theorem; the extended mean value theorem; L’Hopital’s rule; increasing and decreasing
functions; concavity; maximum and minimum values of a function; graphs of functions including
rational functions (asymptotes) and functions with vertical tangents (cusps); antiderivatives; the
indefinite integral; the definite integral; the fundamental theorem of calculus ; the area under a
curve; the area between two curves; transcendental functions: inverse functions, logarithmic and
exponential functions; derivatives and integrals; limits (the indeterminate forms); hyperbolic
functions and their inverses; inverse trigonometric functions.



IT Project Management :Students are expected to explore the processes, procedures, tools and techniques and results to create
and execute an integrated project plan; it also expected to create project charter, determine
requirements, defining creating and managing the project scope, and validating the deliverables. IT
project managers are responsible for planning, organizing, allocating resources, budgeting and
successfully executing organizations’ specific IT goals. This course uses active teaching
methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects. In addition,
speakers from the industry will be invited to discuss case studies and show the latest trends on the
industry


Mobile Programming :Mobile computing course aims at introducing the main concepts of programming mobile
applications including the mobile development environment, user interfaces, activities, intents,
content providers’ / content resolvers, services, broadcast receivers, persistence, MBaaS, location,
sensors, graphics, and other mobile development features, tools, and capabilities. This covers
concepts from Android, Swift, among others. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such
as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects. In addition, speakers from the
industry will be invited to discuss case studies and show the latest trends on the industry



Theory of Algorithms : This is the first course in algorithms. The main goal is to introduce complexity analysis of algorithms
with an emphasis on efficient design techniques for solving various computational problems. Topics
include complexity analysis including big O, big omega, and big theta notations. Recurrence
equations and recursive algorithms. Algorithm design techniques include sequential, divide-andconquer, greedy, and dynamic programming. Sorting algorithms include insertion sort, merge sort,
heap sort, and quicksort. Searching algorithms include breadth-first search and depth-first search.
Graph-based algorithms including Kruskal’s algorithm. Optimization problems include minimum
spanning tree and multistage graph problems. Implementation of several algorithms. The assessment
of this course is through exams, quizzes, and assignments.

Computer Networks : This course explores key concepts and essential technologies of computer networks and broad
range of topics in networking. It includes general overview, networks applications, network
classifications and topologies, network layers, channel performance measures, transmission
media, communication network protocols and architecture; Data link layer: framing, error
detection and correction, CSMA/CD, LAN IEEE standards; Network layer: IP service model, IP
addressing, subnetting, host configuration DHCP, ARP Protocol, ICMP protocol; Transport layer:
UDP protocol, TCP protocol, TCP reliable transfer and sliding window, TCP flow and congestion
control; Application layer: DNS protocol, NAT protocol, HTTP protocol, persistent and nonpersistent HTTP connection. Weekly practice in the lab through active teaching methodologies



Operating Systems :This course introduces students to management of computer resources. It includes: definition and
role of the operating systems, history of operating systems and development, functionality and
structuring methods of a typical operating system; concepts of process versus thread, scheduling,
dispatching and context switching, concurrent execution: the "mutual exclusion" problem and
some solutions; deadlocks: causes, conditions, and methods for resolution; memory management;
virtual memory management; mass-storage structure. The course will involve regular assignments
and instructions on Linux Operating System to map different theoretical parts with Linux


Software Engineering : This course aims is to present software engineering as a body of knowledge. The course is designed
to present software engineering concepts and principles in parallel with the Software Development
Life Cycle (SDLC). The course will begin with an introduction to software engineering, giving
students a definition of this body of knowledge, as well as a discussion of the main methodologies
of software engineering including agile methods i.e., XP. Students will then learn about the five
major phases of the SDLC: requirements gathering and analysis, design, coding/implementation,
validation, and evolution. This includes software modelling using Unified Modelling Language
(UML), a standardized general-purpose modelling language used to create visual models of objectoriented software, for requirements gathering and analysis, and design. Students will also learn
about project management and quality management for the purpose of delivering high-quality
software that satisfies customer needs and is within budget and schedule. Delivery will be by inclass lectures, recorded lectures, practical sessions in the lab, case studies from different domains
(i.e., healthcare domain), and assignments. Assignments will include a term project illustrative of
professional practice in developing computer information systems. One or two guest speakers with
many years of experience in software engineering will be invited to share their first-hand experience
with students. 



Systems Analysis and Design :
This course aims to provide students with a solid background in information systems analysis and
design techniques through a combination of theory and practice. Students will be provided with the
skills that are necessary for the analysis and design of information systems, and will apply these
skills in a step-by-step manner leading from the recognition of a problem to the implementation of
a solution on a case study. The course is divided into four major parts: Systems Analysis
Fundamentals (Part I), Information Requirements Analysis (Part II), The Analysis Process (Part III),
The Essentials of Design (Part IV). Delivery will combine traditional lectures with other active
teaching methodologies, such as group discussions, group solving problems, analysis of cases and
debates, case study from healthcare domain, and assignments. Assignments will include a term
project illustrative of professional practice in computer information systems analysis and design.


Management Information Systems : This course aims at introducing the concepts of management information system and its resources.
This course works as a road map for system management courses. The course covers fundamental
concepts of MIS; by elaborating on the impact of IT on several sectors including: industry, strategy
and finance. In industry, Porter’s five forces models are studied and how they are used to gain
competitive advantages. On the other hand, in strategy, RGT framework is discussed in addition to
Porter’s strategies. Breakeven point is studied as a part of the impact of IT in finance. The major
business initiatives are covered including: Supply Chain Management (SCM), Customer
Relationship Management (CRM), Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and Social Media (SM).
OLTP and OLAP information processing tools which support business intelligence (BI) are also
discussed. IT tools which are used to support OLTP are database and Database Management System
DBMS. On the other hand, IT tools which are used to support OLAP are data warehouse and data
mining tools. Decision Support Systems (DSS) and Expert Systems (ES) are discussed in terms of
concept and usage. E-commerce models, marketing mix, and how to move money easily and
securely are investigated through the course.


Web Server Programming : Course Description
This course is intended to teach students the skills and techniques required to create fully
functioning websites. Students will learn how to configure Internet services, design and publish
dynamic and interactive web pages, implement both client and server-side scripting, and use data
access technologies to manipulate databases.
Specifically, students are introduced to the Visual Web Developer, and how to use it to design,
build, configure server side websites built using ASP.Net. In addition, the VWD is used to introduce
building DB-based web applications, and introduce the concepts of client state management and
web services. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions,
group work and technical projects. In addition, speakers from the industry will be invited to discuss
case studies and show the latest trends on the industry



Statistical Packages : Course Description
This course aims at introducing the main statistical and probabilistic concepts for scientific applicat
ions. In addition, the course introduces different application fields of those concepts in the business
intelligence and decision support systems. The course graphically introduces those concepts utilizi
ng MATLAB as a programming environment for applying statistical/probabilistic methods and tech
niques. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group
work and technical projects.


e-Payment Systems : Financial technologies are drastically changing the financial services industries. This course
provides an introduction to major techniques used in e-payment services such blockchain and
cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin, Ethereum, smart contracts, decentralized applications, smart contracts,
alternative and P2P lending and crowdfunding, and robo-advising. Students are expected to develop
a broad understanding of the recent FinTech development and its impact in the financial industries.
Students will also have hands-on and problem solving experiences that can be useful in e-payment
applications. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions,
group work and technical projects. In addition, speakers from the industry will be invited to discuss
case studies and show the latest trends on the industry.



Information Security and Privacy : This course introduces information security and privacy. The course covers topics related to
cryptography such as symmetric and asymmetric encryptions, hash functions, digital signatures, key
management, and public key infrastructures. Also, the course covers topics related to network
security as packet sniffing, spoofing, TLS, IPSec, Firewalls, wireless networks security.
Furthermore, topics related to Authentication, Authorization, Web security and Steganography will
be covered. Risk analysis and ethics, and their applications to the development of a secure healthcare
systems as a case study will be presented. Practical hands-on will be provided.



Computing Ethics : This course will consider the ethical issues that arise as a result of the increasing use of computers,
and the responsibilities of those who work with computers, The course materials will include
technical issues in using computer science and may focus on a particular area such as software
design as well as more traditional topics such as philosophical theories (e.g. utilitarianism,
deontological theories, and rights), privacy, intellectual property rights, freedom of speech and
liability hacking, viruses, computer crime, and employee surveillance. Group discussions and case
study analysis are discussed.
 



Enterprise Resource Planning Systems : This course introduces the concepts of integrated management of main business processes, often in
real time and mediated by software and technology. In this course the main integrated system that
will be discussed in the ERP system. ERP systems have many modules in a full integrated
organization environment, however; for the purpose of this course three main modules will be
discussed as follow; manufacturing, inventory and supply chain management. The course is an
industrial course, lecturer from the industry take part of teaching cutting edge technologies in this
domain such as SAP, Odoo, ERP next, Meta Fresh. This course uses active teaching methodologies,
such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects. In addition, speakers from
the industry will be invited to discuss case studies and show the latest trends on the industry.
 

Advanced web development : This course is designed to introduce a variety of technologies and techniques typically used in
development of contemporary web-based systems, and to enable students to achieve a level of
fluency in using these in a thoughtful and considered manner. Two web programming techniques
will be introduced. The first is to use web-based embedded scripting language (PHP) on a web
server (Apache) and a server-side database (MySQL), and the second is to use Ajax to manage
asynchronous client-server communication and XML/JSON as data exchange languages.
This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work
and technical projects.



e-Business : E-Business can be defined as business transacted via the Internet and World Wide Web. Each year,
e-commerce accounts for billions of dollars in transactions between business and consumers and
over a trillion dollars in business-to-business transactions. E-commerce experienced explosive
entrepreneurial growth between 1995 and 2000 before the "bursting of the dot.com bubble". The
impact of e-commerce is not just in the creation of Web-based businesses but represents the building
of a new industrial order.
This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work
and technical projects.



Business Intelligence : Business Intelligence Systems have become increasingly important in today's competitive
environment. According to recent studies, companies that use BI and manage their data as a strategic
resource and invest in its quality are already pulling ahead in terms of reputation and profitability.
This course will examine Business Intelligence (BI) technologies that help a company to improve
its business. It discusses BI topics from both managerial and technical perspectives. Managerial
perspectives discuss how BI affects the organization's decision-making process, while technical
perspectives discuss the foundation for an intelligent system (i.e., Machine learning, Warehousing,
Online Analytical Processing, Data Mining). Practical exercises and projects will be assigned to
enhance students' experience in business intelligent systems. This course uses active teaching
methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects. In addition,
speakers from the industry will be invited to discuss case studies and show the latest trends on the
industry.

Simulation in Business :The purpose of the course is to have students understand the general principles of simulation model
design and concepts of computer simulation. The course introduces students to simulation types,
mathematical model types and simulation software and languages. The course covers in details
simulation of discrete system (Discrete Event Simulation and simulation by different equations) and 
simulation of continuous system using differential equations with practical examples in
management, banking, manufacturing and computer networks. Both Python programming
language and MS Excel software are intended to be used throughout the course. This course uses
active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical
projects.

Knowledge Management Systems : Knowledge management course will introduce the objectives of knowledge management, the
definition of knowledge management, knowledge organization and structuring, knowledge
management concepts, knowledge management implementation and applications covering AI, ML,
Semantic Web ontologies among many. Knowledge modelling, building, exchanging/sharing
methods will be covered as well in this course.
This course is designed for data-oriented students with interest in machine interpretable methods
for knowledge capture and sharing. It can be considered an introduction course for web-based
knowledge graph technologies.
This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work
and technical projects. In addition, speakers from the industry will be invited to discuss case studies
and show the latest trends on the industry. 

Total Quality Management :This course introduces students to the use of quality management (QM) principles to the fastpaced, dynamic, and global software (Product) development. Many concepts are introduced
such as quality assurance (PQA) types, models, structures, operations, controls and development
environment. In addition to Software Quality Process Theory, Metrics
Product and Quality Testing; Verification, Validation, Test Levels and Testing Types. Software
Engineering Standards in Testing and Quality Control and Assurance are also explained.
Metrics are covered with real-life examples. Students are introduced to TQM basic concepts, tools,
static measurements and applications such as, Statistical Process Control, Hardware reliability,
Function Point (FP) analysis, Defect Density Measurement, Customer Satisfaction Measurement
and other Problem Solving and Decision Making. This course uses active teaching methodologies,
such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects. In addition, speakers from
the industry will be invited to discuss case studies and show the latest trends on the industry



Document Analysis & Recognition : Course Description
The purpose of the course is to provide a comprehensive knowledge of theoretical background and
practical applications of digital image processing techniques, analysis and enhancement both in the
spatial and frequency domains. Students are given practical experience of utilizing digital image
processing for real world examples of document analysis and recognition using MATLAB. This
course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and 


Information Resource Management :

Roles of information systems in the overall strategy and management of organizations; Organization
management; Information resources: Personnel, planning and control, technological trends,
management implications, managing MIS department; Outflow of information; Documents
generation and distribution; Team management; New issues in MIS


Semantic Web : The Web Semantic course will introduce the notion of the Web Semantic, provide an overview of
the underlying theory and technology, cover existing technologies and practices, and highlight
current and potential applications. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly
lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects.


Operations Research : This course emphasizes the use of quantitative methods and techniques for effective decisionmaking. Model formulations and applications are used in solving business decision problems.
Topics include: Linear Programming, Transportation, Assignment, CPM/PERT techniques, and
Game Theory are covered. The course is an application oriented, it emphasizes learning by doing.
Analytic techniques and computer packages will be used to solve problems facing business
managers in decision environments


e-Learning & Applications : This course introduces students to the concept of Electronic Learning and its applications within
today’s fast-paced, dynamic, and global environment 



e-Government : Course Description
This course introduces the ways in which internet technologies are affecting how people interact
with government, and how governments, in turn, are using and managing these technologies to
better provide information and services to the public. It also emphasizes the benefits of adopting IT
in e-government for all stockholders. It introduces the technology of e-government with an in-depth
examination of current government development models and management challenges in the
delivery of services and information, electronically. Furthermore, it will explore the skills and
concepts needed to effectively manage e-government projects. Lastly, some successful practices of
e-government projects will be addressed to emphasize the importance of implementing egovernment.
 

Security Risk Management and Ethics : This course introduces students to the three key elements of risk management. Topics covered: risk
analysis, risk assessment, and vulnerability assessment. Both quantitative and qualitative
methodologies will be discussed as well as how security metrics can be modeled, monitored, and
controlled. Several case studies will be used to demonstrate the risk management principles featured
throughout the course. Risk assessments on the selected case study scenarios will be conducted by
team work. Mitigation plans will be developed, and the results of their analysis will be presented,
both in written reports and oral presentations. Ethical implications of security procedures will be
studied as well.

Software Packages: In order to develop students' skills which will enable them to get processional certificate, this course
will introduce students to some certified software packages like SAP/3, Merlin MRP, Microsoft
Management Packages and or any other software package that can add value to students. Weekly
lab session.

Advanced Computer Networks :This course explains and discusses advanced concepts of computer networks. Topics includes:
VLANs, routing protocol; advanced TCP, silly window syndrome, adaptive timeout; network
analysis, architecture, and design. network performance metrics measurements, polices and
monitoring network management, SNMP protocol, SIM protocol, MIB protocol; asynchronous
transfer Mode (ATM). Assessment will be through exams, assignments, and quizzes.


Multimedia : This course aims to introduce the theoretical concepts of digital media including images, audio,
animation and video. The difference between analog and digital media and the digital media storage
process is discussed including the digital media encoding and decoding main concepts. An
introduction to the different types of digital media compression techniques including the most
popular file formats for each media type and digital memory issues. Lectures will be given in the
lab for practical application. This course is assessed through exams, practical tests and assignments.


Information Retrieva :The course aims at studying the theory, design, and implementation of text-based information
systems. The course introduces IR core concepts on an abstract level, in addition to a design and an
implementation of an IR system utilizing the acquired knowledge from the course. The course
introduces several state-of-the-art IR concepts, as well as, trendy case studies in modern IR.
After this course, students are expected to be able to design and implement a fully functional textbased retrieval system utilizing the acquired knowledge from this course. This course uses active
teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab applied sessions, group work and technical projects.

Enterprise Application Development :This course explores advanced application development techniques in a large enterprise wide
setting. Topics include component development and reuse, distributed object technologies, multitier applications, data marshaling, transaction processing, concurrency problems and resolutions,
load balancing and tuning, and application installation and deployment issues. This course uses 


Database Languages and Tools : Develop database applications in a production environment using Oracle Developer 10g utilities
which provides a comprehensive guide for developing database applications using Oracle 10g
relational database and Developer 10g application development utilities. Database developments
activities include using SQL commands to create tables and insert, update, delete and view data
values. This course provides an overview of PL/SQL, explores the Developer 10g application
development tools, and describes how to create an integrated database application, also it covers
how to display application component in a Web browser and gives an overview to the database
administration activities. This course uses active teaching methodologies, such as weekly lab
applied sessions, group work and technical projects.


Accounting Principles (1) : This course is an intensive study of the development of the accounting cycle, preparation of financial
statements, and accounting for corporations. This course emphasizes international financial
reporting standards and their application in understanding theories and policies relative to asset
valuation, liability measurement, income determination, inventory costing methods, and internal
control
 

PRINCIPLES OF MICROECONOMICS :This course is an introductory course in microeconomics. Some of the issues covered include the
foundations of economics, core concepts of microeconomics, Demand and Supply forces, the
structure of product market, and production costs, and markets of resources 


Data Mining : This course provides the students with an introduction to data mining, that is knowledge discovery
from data (KDD). This course explores the concepts and techniques of knowledge discovery and
data mining. The course will focus on issues relating to the feasibility, usefulness, effectiveness,
and scalability of techniques for the discovery of patterns hidden in large data sets. The students
will learn the basic concepts of data pre-processing, frequent pattern mining and association rules,
classification, clustering, and outlier detection. Lectures will be given in the lab for practical
application. This course is assessed through exams, practical tests and assignments.

Advanced Java Programming : This course aims to introduce advanced programming skills based on core concepts of ObjectOriented Programming (OOP) and Design using Java programming language. It builds on the OOP
course to finalize a Java full-stack application. This course starts with using some Java classes such
as String, StringBuffer and StringBuilder, and StringtTokenizer for string-processing. It also
focuses on I/O operations using files and streams, and JavaFX for developing rich client
applications. In addition to, GUI components, event-handling, Generics, exception-handling,
multithreading, and JavaFX Event-Handler using Inner Class, Anonymous Class, and Lambda
Expression. Finally, it introduces databases connectivity using JDBC. The JDBC case study is based
on MySQL Database and Eclipse IDE. Lectures will be given in the lab for practical application.
This course is assessed through project, exams, practical tests and assignments.

Human Computer Interaction :This course aims to provide an introduction to various Human Computer Interaction related topics.
This course explains the components and steps of designing, developing and evaluating interactive
computer systems for human use. It also addresses the importance of Ergonomics, interaction design
and its activities, data gathering and analysis, prototyping, evaluation paradigms and techniques
universal design principles, and Non-traditional interfaces of all kinds. It also highlights the steps
of designing graphical user interfaces to achieve usability and user experience in interactive
systems. The course also presents the need to adopt ideas that serve users with special needs and
impairments. The content of the course enables students to deploy interaction design principles into
health related applications (healthcare and patient management), where students are required to
show the interaction design activities, prototyping, evaluation paradigms and techniques, and 
universal design principles in the project, which is considered one of the most important outcomes
of the course where students apply everything they have learned in this course.

Fundamentals of IoT : This course introduces the fundamentals of the Internet Of Things (IoT) and discusses how the
Internet of Things IoT works. Topics covered span IoT networking, IoT smart objects, IoT
Networking protocols, and smart object connections. In addition, the course explores IoT data
networks, connection types, IoT security, and popular applications of IoT networks. Simulationbased hands-on exercises and project will be offered.



Artificial Intelligence : The aim of the course is to enable students to solve problems using explicit knowledge and
reasoning techniques and to develop expert systems for simple problems. Students will be able (1)
to express knowledge of a simple domain in propositional and/or first-order predicate calculus, (2)
to design and develop expert solutions to simple problems where AI techniques can be employed,
and (3) to write simple programs in Prolog that reason about the available knowledge to achieve
their goals. Furthermore, students will learn some simple blind and heuristic search algorithms such
as depth-first, breadth-first, best-first, hill climbing, and simulated annealing and techniques on how
to control search using production systems. They will also have the ability to decide the appropriate
search techniques (blind or heuristic) for some problems. This course will use a combination of
lectures, class discussions, reading and writing assignments, case studies analysis, and hands-on
work.













Project-1 :This course represents the first stage of the graduation project, and it includes the theoretical aspects
related to current problems and applications in IT. Student(s) should define, analyze the problem,
and finally write a proposal. Then to present it to a predetermined committee in the department. It
includes weekly meetings with the supervisors.

Project -2 :This course represents the second stage of the graduation project. It includes the practical aspects:
design, implementation, testing, and evaluation stages, and completing the project in its final
version. A documentation of the whole project should be submitted for presentation and final
examination. It includes weekly meetings with the supervisors.













